docs: add debugging process (#1677)
VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog: docs/docs/advanced/debugging.md

---
sidebar_position: 10
title: 🐛 Debugging
---

In some cases, you'll want to debug your Dart Frog app, and you might have noticed that by adding just the breakpoint, the debugger doesn't stop there like it does by default in a Flutter app.
Below, there are two quick and easy options for debugging code in Dart Frog.

> ## Debugging with Dart Frog Plugin 🐸

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Debugging with Dart Frog IDE Extension 🐸
```

:::caution

> This plugin is only available for Visual Studio Code, if you are using another IDE, please check the second option.

Reviewer: Nit: refer to the actual section rather than "second", it tends to be easier to maintain. If you can anchor the "Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process" text even better.

```suggestion
This extension is only available for Visual Studio Code, if you are using another IDE, please refer to the Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process section.
```

> :::

Reviewer: Maybe we can add another note for those interested in an Android Studio extension to refer to the issue: https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/issues/1326, or for those interested in OpenVSX, https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/issues/907.

> - Go to the Visual Studio Code Marketplace in [here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) and install the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Go to the Visual Studio Code Marketplace in [here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) and install the extension.
```

:::info

> You can also install the plugin by searching for `Dart Frog` in the extensions tab in Visual Studio Code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also install the extension by searching for `Dart Frog` in the extensions tab in Visual Studio Code.
```

:::

- Open your Dart Frog app.
- Open **Visual Studio Command Palette** by clicking `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) / `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux).
  You will see different options as shown in the image below.

![Dart Frog Plugin Options](images/dart_frog_plugin_options.png)

- Click on the `Dart Frog: Start and Debug Development Server` option. This will start the Dart Frog server in debug mode.

:::note
You can also select the `Dart Frog: Debug Development Server` option if you already have the server running.
:::

> - Add the breakpoints in your code and try to access the page where you added them. You will now see that the debugger stops at your breakpoints 🎉.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add the breakpoints in your code and try to access the endpoint where it gets hit. You will now see that the debugger stops at your breakpoints 🎉.
```

![Demo - Dart Frog Plugin](images/debugging_with_plugin.gif)

## Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process 🎯

- Open your Dart Frog application and run the server using the `dart_frog dev` command.
- In the terminal, you'll see something like `The Dart VM service is listening on http://127.0.0.1:8181/XXXXXXXXX/`. Copy the URL, as you'll need it in the next steps.
- Open the **Visual Studio Command Palette** by clicking `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) / `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux) and search for `Debug: Attach to Dart process`.
- Paste the URL you copied in the previous steps and press `Enter`. Now the debugger will stop at the breakpoints you added in your code 🎉.

> ![Demo - Dart Process](images/debugging_with_dart_process.gif)

Reviewer: I think the images are usually being stored under the `docs/static/img` directory. Not sure if this structure will serve them as expected, I haven't tried deploying this new documentation locally.

---
sidebar_position: 10
title: 🐛 Debugging
---

In some cases, you'll want to debug your Dart Frog app, and you might have noticed that by adding just the breakpoint, the debugger doesn't stop there like it does by default in a Flutter app.
Below, there are two quick and easy options for debugging code in Dart Frog.

## Debugging with Dart Frog IDE Extension 🐸

:::caution

> This extension is only available for Visual Studio Code, if you are using another IDE, please refer to the **Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process** section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extension is currently only available for Visual Studio Code, if you are using another IDE, please refer to the [**Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process**](#debugging-by-attaching-to-dart-process-) section.
```

:::

:::info
If you are interested in an extension for Android Studio or OpenVSX there are some open issues you can follow to learn more about it.

- **Android Studio** [#1326](https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/issues/1326)

- **OpenVSX** [#907](https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/issues/907)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: I added this space because otherwise, VScode complains about it.
![CleanShot 2025-01-28 at 10 06 35@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aa835846-e845-491e-a7cd-189de0c8eaf5)

:::

> - Go to the Visual Studio Code Marketplace in [here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) and install the extension.

Reviewer: I think it reads better when we enumerate the steps, like in our "Deploy" sections.

```suggestion
1. Go to the Visual Studio Code Marketplace in [here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) and install the extension.
```

Could you apply the numbers to the following steps too? And also for those in "Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process"?

Author: I can add the enumeration list, but just to let you know if you have an enumerated list and in the middle of the list you have for example a note or a tip, the IDE complains because the numbers are not following each other.

![CleanShot 2025-01-28 at 10 08 32@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/757a552f-8cd9-433d-a46f-273283ced9c4)

> - Go to the Visual Studio Code Marketplace in [here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) and install the extension.

Reviewer: The Dart Frog extension requires the Dart extension to be installed previously in the IDE. Maybe we can add a step detailing such. 

In most cases if the user doesn't have the Dart extension installed this should happen automatically since it is listed as a required dependency: https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/blob/a9e2a1c7c1742e22829b3d7c580d5188c807c9b4/extensions/vscode/package.json#L148

:::info

> You can also install the extension by searching for `Dart Frog` in the extensions tab in Visual Studio Code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also install the extension by searching for `Dart Frog` in the [extensions tab in Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-marketplace#_browse-for-extensions).
```

:::

- Open your Dart Frog app.

> - Open **Visual Studio Command Palette** by clicking `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) / `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open [**Visual Studio Command Palette**](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/ux-guidelines/command-palette) by clicking `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) / `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux).
```

  You will see different options as shown in the image below.

![Dart Frog Extension Options](../../static/img/dart_frog_extension_options.png)

- Click on the `Dart Frog: Start and Debug Development Server` option. This will start the Dart Frog server in debug mode.

:::info

> You can also select the `Dart Frog: Debug Development Server` option if you already have the server running.

Reviewer: The Dart Frog server can also be run through "Code Lens", the small text that appears on top of the route function name. Or by using the Dart Frog icon within the Status Bar (appears you have a Dart Frog application open as in your IDE). 

Not sure if we could mention those here too.

Author: I added the code lens option, but in the status bar I only see the option to run the server, but it doesn't run in debug mode

:::

- Add the breakpoints in your code and try to access the endpoint where it gets hit. You will now see that the debugger stops at your breakpoints 🎉.

![Demo - Dart Frog Extension](../../static/img/debugging_with_extension.gif)

## Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process 🎯

- Open your Dart Frog application and run the server using the `dart_frog dev` command.
- In the terminal, you'll see something like `The Dart VM service is listening on http://127.0.0.1:8181/XXXXXXXXX/`. Copy the URL, as you'll need it in the next steps.

> - Open the **Visual Studio Command Palette** by clicking `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) / `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux) and search for `Debug: Attach to Dart process`.

Reviewer: This is only possible if the user has the Dart extension installed, maybe we can add a small step here so the user can install or verify it has it installed.

3. Open your Dart Frog app within Visual Studio Code.
4. Open the [**Visual Studio Command Palette**](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/ux-guidelines/command-palette) by using `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) or `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux).

   ![Dart Frog Extension Options](../../static/img/dart_frog_extension_options.png)

5. Click on the `Dart Frog: Start and Debug Development Server` option. This will start the Dart Frog server in debug mode.

:::info
You can also select the `Dart Frog: Debug Development Server` option if you already have the server running.
:::

6. Add the breakpoints in your code and try to access the endpoint where it gets hit. You will now see that the debugger stops at your breakpoints 🎉.

![Demo - Dart Frog Extension](../../static/img/debugging_with_extension.gif)

:::tip
Another way to run the server in debug mode using the `Dart Frog IDE Extension` is by using [Code Lens](https://code.visualstudio.com/blogs/2017/02/12/code-lens-roundup) in Visual Studio Code.
:::

> ![Demo - Code Lens](../../static/img/debugging_code_lens.gif)

Reviewer: Should this be inside the tip?

Author: It shouldn't, since it's a demo video.

Reviewer: But isn't the demo video highly associated to the tip's content?

---
sidebar_position: 10
title: 🐛 Debugging
---

In some cases, you'll want to debug your Dart Frog app, and you might have noticed that by adding just the breakpoint, the debugger doesn't stop there like it does by default in a Flutter app.
Below, there are three quick and easy options for debugging code in Dart Frog.

## Debugging with Dart Frog IDE Extension 🐸

:::caution
This extension is currently only available for Visual Studio Code, if you are using another IDE, please refer to the [**Debugging by Attaching to Dart Process**](#debugging-by-attaching-to-dart-process-) section.
:::

:::info

> If you are interested in an extension for Android Studio or OpenVSX there are some open issues you can follow to learn more about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are interested in an extension for Android Studio or OpenVSX there are some open issues you can follow to learn more about it:
```

- **Android Studio** [#1326](https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/issues/1326)

- **OpenVSX** [#907](https://github.com/VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog/issues/907)

:::

1. Go to the Visual Studio Code Marketplace in [here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) and install the extension. You can also install the extension by searching for `Dart Frog` in the [extensions tab in Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-marketplace#_browse-for-extensions).

> 2. If you do not have the `Dart` extension installed, visit the [Dart extension page](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.dart-code) to install it. You can also install the extension by searching for `Dart` in the [extensions tab in Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-marketplace#_browse-for-extensions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If you do not have the `Dart` extension installed, you can install it from the [extensions tab in Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-marketplace#_browse-for-extensions), or directly from the [Visual Studio Code marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.dart-code).
```

> 3. Open your Dart Frog app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Open your Dart Frog app within Visual Studio Code.
```

> 4. Open [**Visual Studio Command Palette**](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/ux-guidelines/command-palette) by clicking `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) / `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Open the [**Visual Studio Command Palette**](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/ux-guidelines/command-palette) by using `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) or `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux).
```

:::caution
To debug the `Dart Frog server` using this approach, you should have the `Dart` extension installed in Visual Studio Code. If you are using another IDE, make sure you have `Dart` installed.

You can install the extension by searching for `Dart` in the [Extensions tab in Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-marketplace#_browse-for-extensions), or directly from [here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Dart-Code.dart-code).
:::

1. Open your Dart Frog application and run the server using the `dart_frog dev` command.
2. In the terminal, you'll see something like `The Dart VM service is listening on http://127.0.0.1:8181/XXXXXXXXX/`. Copy the URL, as you'll need it in the next steps.
3. Open [**Visual Studio Command Palette**](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/ux-guidelines/command-palette) by clicking `Shift` + `Command` + `P` (Mac) / `Ctrl` + `Shift` + `P` (Windows/Linux).
4. Paste the URL you copied in the previous steps and press `Enter`. Now the debugger will stop at the breakpoints you added in your code 🎉.

![Demo - Dart Process](../../static/img/debugging_with_dart_process.gif)

> ## Debugging using Code Lens 👓

Reviewer: I would personally include this as a note or a sub section within the first section "Debugging with Dart Frog IDE Extension". Since it is related to the IDE Extension.
